अग्रे पश्यामि तेजो निबिडतरकलायावलीलोभनीयं
पीयूषाप्लावितोऽहं तदनु तदुदरे दिव्यकैशोरवेषम् ।
तारुण्यारम्भरम्यं परमसुखरसास्वादरोमाञ्चिताङ्गै-
रावीतं नारदाद्यैर्विलसदुपनिषत्सुन्दरीमण्डलैश्च ॥१॥
अग्रे पश्यामि तेज:	in front (of me) I see a radiance
निबिडतर-कलाय-	(like that of) very thick Kalaaya (blue lily)
अवली-लोभनीयं	array, charming
पीयूष-आप्लावित:-अहं	in the nectar bathed am I
तत्-अनु तत्-उदरे	then in its centre (of the radiance)
दिव्य-कैशोर-वेषम्	in a divine young form of a body
तारुण्य-आरम्भ-रम्यं	the onset of youth enchanting
परम-सुख-रस-आस्वाद-	supreme bliss nectar experiencing
रोमाञ्चित-अङ्गै:-	by enthralled bodied
आवीतं नारद-आद्यै:-	surrounded by Naarada etc.,
विलसत्-उपनिषत्-	resplendent Upanishads
सुन्दरी-मण्डलै:-च	and as a group of beautiful women
In front of me I see a bluish radiance excelling a very thick array of Kalaaya (blue lily) flowers. I am bathed in the nectar of the sight. Then, in the centre of the radiance I see the form of a divine young body enchanting by the budding of youth. He is surrounded by sages like Naarada thrilled with ecstatic bliss, and by a group of beautiful women who are the Upanishads embodied.
नीलाभं कुञ्चिताग्रं घनममलतरं संयतं चारुभङ्ग्या
रत्नोत्तंसाभिरामं वलयितमुदयच्चन्द्रकै: पिञ्छजालै: ।
मन्दारस्रङ्निवीतं तव पृथुकबरीभारमालोकयेऽहं
स्निग्धश्वेतोर्ध्वपुण्ड्रामपि च सुललितां फालबालेन्दुवीथीम् ॥२॥
नीलाभं कुञ्चिताग्रं	dark and curly in front
घनम्-अमलतरं	thick and very clean
संयतं चारु-भङ्ग्या	held together in a beautiful manner
रत्न-उत्तंस-अभिरामं	bejewelled very beautifully
वलयितम्-उदयत्-चन्द्रकै:	encircled by glistening eyed
पिञ्छजालै:	peacock feather plumes
मन्दार-स्रक्-निवीतं	mandaar flower garland tied with
तव पृथु-कबरी-भारम्-	Thy luxuriant locks of hair
आलोकये-अहं	see I
स्निग्ध-श्वेत-ऊर्ध्व-	and soft white upright
पुण्ड्राम्-अपि च	sandal paste mark also
सुललितां फाल-	(on a) smooth forehead (like a)
बाल-इन्दु-वीथीम्	young moon's line
हृद्यं पूर्णानुकम्पार्णवमृदुलहरीचञ्चलभ्रूविलासै-
रानीलस्निग्धपक्ष्मावलिपरिलसितं नेत्रयुग्मं विभो ते ।
सान्द्रच्छायं विशालारुणकमलदलाकारमामुग्धतारं
कारुण्यालोकलीलाशिशिरितभुवनं क्षिप्यतां मय्यनाथे ॥३॥
हृद्यं पूर्ण-अनुकम्पा-	attractive, full of compassion's
अर्णव-मृदु-लहरी-	oceans' gentle waves
चञ्चल-भ्रू-विलासै:-	playful eyebrows tremulous play
आनील-स्निग्ध-पक्ष्म-	bluish glistening eyelashes
आवलि-परिलसितं	rows beautifying
नेत्र-युग्मं विभो ते	the two eyes of Thee O Lord!
सान्द्र-च्छायं	very lustrous
विशाल-अरुण-	big red
कमल-दल-आकारम्-	lotus petal shaped
आमुग्ध-तारं	very beautiful pupils
कारुण्य-आलोक-लीला-	merciful glances casting
शिशिरित-भुवनं	cooling the worlds
क्षिप्यतां मयि-अनाथे	do cast on me, the forsaken
O All pervading Lord! Do cast on me, the forsaken one, the glances of Thy pair of eyes which are attractive with brows that are tremulous like gentle waves in the ocean of compassion. Thy eyes which are very lustrous and have rows of beautiful bluish eyelashes. They are shaped like big red lotus petals and have very beautiful pupils. Thy glances cool the worlds.
उत्तुङ्गोल्लासिनासं हरिमणिमुकुरप्रोल्लसद्गण्डपाली-
व्यालोलत्कर्णपाशाञ्चितमकरमणीकुण्डलद्वन्द्वदीप्रम् ।
उन्मीलद्दन्तपङ्क्तिस्फुरदरुणतरच्छायबिम्बाधरान्त:-
प्रीतिप्रस्यन्दिमन्दस्मितमधुरतरं वक्त्रमुद्भासतां मे ॥४॥
उत्तुङ्ग-उल्लासि-नासं	high prominent beautiful nose
हरि-मणि-मुकुर-	emerald mirror
प्रोल्लसत्-गण्ड-पाली-	reflecting cheek area
व्यालोलत्-कर्ण-पाश-	dangling near the ears
अञ्चित-मकर-मणी-	marked with fish and studded with gems
कुण्डल-द्वन्द्व-दीप्रम्	earring's pair resplendent
उन्मीलत्-दन्त-पङ्क्ति-	revealing the rows of teeth
स्फुरत्-अरुणतर-च्छाय-	quivering ruby red
बिम्ब-अधरान्त:-	like bimba fruit, between the lips
प्रीति-प्रस्यन्दि-	with love flowing
मन्द-स्मित-मधुर-तरं	gentle smile very sweet
वक्त्रं-उद्भासतां मे	Thy face, may be clear and shines unto me
Thy face is beautiful with a prominent and well shaped nose, Thy cheek area, like an emerald mirror reflects the pair of fish shaped gem studded earrings dangling from the ears, are resplendent. Thy quivering ruby red lips like the bimba fruit, slightly parted reveal Thy beautiful row of teeth, and the very sweet gentle smile over flows with love. O Lord! may that Thy face clearly shine unto me.
बाहुद्वन्द्वेन रत्नोज्ज्वलवलयभृता शोणपाणिप्रवाले-
नोपात्तां वेणुनाली प्रसृतनखमयूखाङ्गुलीसङ्गशाराम् ।
कृत्वा वक्त्रारविन्दे सुमधुरविकसद्रागमुद्भाव्यमानै:
शब्दब्रह्मामृतैस्त्वं शिशिरितभुवनै: सिञ्च मे कर्णवीथीम् ॥५॥
बाहु-द्वन्द्वेन	by two hands
रत्न-उज्ज्वल-वलय-भृता	studded shining bangles wearing
शोण-पाणि-प्रवालेन-	red hands like corals
उपात्तां वेणुनाली	holding the flute
प्रसृत-नख-मयूख-	spreading from the nails the rays
अङ्गुली-सङ्ग-शाराम्	by Thy fingers' contact made multi colored
कृत्वा वक्त्र-अरविन्दे	applied to Thy face lotus
सुमधुर-विकसत्-	sweet producing
रागम्-उद्भाव्यमानै:	melodies flowing
शब्द-ब्रह्म-अमृतै:-	sound as Brahman nectar
त्वं शिशिरित-भुवनै:	Thou cooling the worlds
सिञ्च मे कर्ण-वीथीम्	soak my ear passages
Deign to soak my ear passages, with the extremely sweet melodies which cool all the worlds and which are Brahman Itself in the form of sound, which flows out of Thy flute which is placed on Thy lotus mouth. The flute is multi colored by the contact with the finger nails' rays spreading out, the two hands wearing studded shining bangles and red as coral, holding it.
उत्सर्पत्कौस्तुभश्रीततिभिररुणितं कोमलं कण्ठदेशं
वक्ष: श्रीवत्सरम्यं तरलतरसमुद्दीप्रहारप्रतानम् ।
नानावर्णप्रसूनावलिकिसलयिनीं वन्यमालां विलोल-
ल्लोलम्बां लम्बमानामुरसि तव तथा भावये रत्नमालाम् ॥६॥
उत्सर्पत्-कौस्तुभ-	emitting (from the) Kaustubha
श्री-ततिभि:-अरुणितं	lustrous ray collection (by which) rendered red
कोमलं कण्ठ-देशं	delicate neck area
वक्ष: श्रीवत्स-रम्यं	chest with Shreevatsa mark beautified
तरलतर-समुद्दीप्र-	tremulous and brilliant
हार-प्रतानं	necklaces many
नाना-वर्ण-प्रसून-	various colored flowers
अवलि-किसलयिनीं	rows and tender sprouts
वन्यमालां विलोलत्-	wild flower garlands hovering
लोलम्बां लम्बमानाम्-	( on which) bees, hanging
उरसि तव तथा	on Thy chest, thus
भावये रत्नमालाम्	I meditate, on the gem necklaces
I meditate on Thy handsome neck rendered red by the lustrous rays emitting from the Kaustubh jewel, Thy chest beautified with the Shreevatsa mark, tremulous and brilliant many pearl and gem necklaces and garlands made from rows of wild multi colored flowers, with bees hovering on them, spread on Thy chest.
अङ्गे पञ्चाङ्गरागैरतिशयविकसत्सौरभाकृष्टलोकं
लीनानेकत्रिलोकीविततिमपि कृशां बिभ्रतं मध्यवल्लीम् ।
शक्राश्मन्यस्ततप्तोज्ज्वलकनकनिभं पीतचेलं दधानं
ध्यायामो दीप्तरश्मिस्फुटमणिरशनाकिङ्किणीमण्डितं त्वां ॥७॥
अङ्गे पञ्च-अङ्ग-रागै:-	on Thy body, of five ingredients, the uguent
अतिशय-विकसत्-सौरभ-	very much spreading fragrance
आकृष्ट-लोकं	(and so) attracting the whole world
लीन-अनेक-त्रिलोकी	holding the whole of the three worlds
विततिम्-अपि कृशां	as a group, even then, slender
बिभ्रतं मध्यवल्लीम्	having midriff (waist), like a creeper
शक्र-अश्म-न्यस्त-	on a sapphire rock placed
तप्त-उज्ज्वल-कनक-निभं	molten, shining gold like
पीत-चेलं दधानं ध्यायाम:	yellow cloth wearing, we meditate on
दीप्त-रश्मि-स्फुट-	brilliant rays emitting
मणि-रशना-	gem studded girdle (with)
किङ्किणी-मण्डितं त्वाम्	mini bells (adorned) Thee
We meditate on Thee, the unguents of five ingredients smeared on whose body attracts the whole world by the spreading of its fragrance. We meditate on Thee whose midriff waist is slender and creeper like, even though it holds all the three worlds within. We meditate on Thee whose body is like a rock of sapphire, and is adorned by a yellow silk cloth which is shining like molten gold and wearing a girdle made of studded gems and with minibells on it, emitting brilliant rays.
ऊरू चारू तवोरू घनमसृणरुचौ चित्तचोरौ रमाया:
विश्वक्षोभं विशङ्क्य ध्रुवमनिशमुभौ पीतचेलावृताङ्गौ ।
आनम्राणां पुरस्तान्न्यसनधृतसमस्तार्थपालीसमुद्ग-
च्छायं जानुद्वयं च क्रमपृथुलमनोज्ञे च जङ्घे निषेवे ॥८॥
ऊरू चारू तव-ऊरू	stout handsome Thy thighs
घन-मसृण-रुचौ	solid and soft and charming
चित्त-चोरौ रमाया:	stealing Ramaa's heart
विश्व-क्षोभं विशङ्क्य	the whole world excitement, fearing
ध्रुवम्-अनिशम्-उभौ	certainly, always them both
पीत-चेल-आवृत-अङ्गौ	(with) yellow cloth covering both parts
आनम्राणां पुरस्तात्-	in front of the devotees
न्यसन-धृत-समस्त-	putting and holding all
अर्थ-पाली-समुद्गत्-	the collection of desired objects, a casket
छायं जानु-द्वयं च	like, and two knees
क्रम-पृथुल मनोज्ञे	tapering and beautiful
च जङ्घे निषेवे	forelegs, I meditate on
I meditate on Thy two handsome thighs, which are solid soft and charming, stealing Ramaa's heart. Fearing to excite the whole world, definitely, they are always covered with yellow silk cloth. Thy two knees, are like two caskets holding all the desired objects for Thy devotees, and Thy two forelegs are beautifully tapered and fleshy.
मञ्जीरं मञ्जुनादैरिव पदभजनं श्रेय इत्यालपन्तं
पादाग्रं भ्रान्तिमज्जत्प्रणतजनमनोमन्दरोद्धारकूर्मम् ।
उत्तुङ्गाताम्रराजन्नखरहिमकरज्योत्स्नया चाऽश्रितानां
सन्तापध्वान्तहन्त्रीं ततिमनुकलये मङ्गलामङ्गुलीनाम् ॥९॥
मञ्जीरं मञ्जु-नादै:-इव	the anklets, by their sweet sound, as if
पद-भजनं श्रेय	(Thy) feet worship is excellent
इति-आलपन्तं	thus saying
पाद-अग्रं भ्रान्ति-मज्जत्-	the forefeet, at the time of deluge, sinking
प्रणत-जन-मन:-	prostrating peoples' minds
मन्दर-उद्धार-कूर्मम्	the Mandaar mountain lifting up tortoise
उत्तुङ्ग-आताम्र-राजत्-	raised, very red and shining
नखर-हिमकर-ज्योत्स्नया	toe nails' moon light
च-आश्रितानां	and of the devotees
सन्ताप-ध्वान्त-हन्त्रीं	sorrowful darkness expelling
ततिम्-अनुकलये	rows (of toe nails) I meditate on
मङ्गलाम्-अङ्गुलीनाम्	(of the) auspicious toes
I meditate on Thy anklets with their sweet sound, which, as it were, sweetly confirm the excellence of worshipping at Thy feet. Thy incarnation of the tortoise which lifted up the Mandaar mountain at the time of the deluge, Thy forefeet lift up the minds of the people who prostrate at Thy feet. Thy toe nails, of Thy auspicious toes, slightly raised, very red and shining are like the moon light expelling the darkness of the sorrows of Thy devotees. I meditate on them.
योगीन्द्राणां त्वदङ्गेष्वधिकसुमधुरं मुक्तिभाजां निवासो
भक्तानां कामवर्षद्युतरुकिसलयं नाथ ते पादमूलम् ।
नित्यं चित्तस्थितं मे पवनपुरपते कृष्ण कारुण्यसिन्धो
हृत्वा निश्शेषतापान् प्रदिशतु परमानन्दसन्दोहलक्ष्मीम् ॥१०॥
योगीन्द्राणां	for the great yogis
त्वत्-अङ्गेषु-	among Thy body parts
अधिक-सुमधुरं	most beloved
मुक्तिभाजां निवास:	for the liberated ones, (they) are the residence
भक्तानां काम-वर्ष-	for the devotees, the desires pouring
द्यु-तरु-किसलयं	heavenly tree's sprouts
नाथ ते पादमूलम्	are, O Lord! Soles of Thy feet
नित्यं चित्त-स्थितं मे	may they always rest in my mind
पवनपुरपते कृष्ण	O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Krishna!
करुणासिन्धो	O Ocean of Compassion!
हृत्वा निश्शेष-तापान्	destroying all my sufferings
प्रदिशतु परम-आनन्द-	confer (on me) Supreme Bliss
सन्दोह-लक्षमीम्	in a flow of fullness (abundance)
O Lord! Among the parts of Thy body, the soles of Thy feet are the most beloved and coveted to the great yogis. The liberated ones reside there. They pour all the desires of their devotees, and are like the sprouts of the celestial tree. O Lord of Guruvaayur! O Lord Krishna! may those feet always rest in my heart. O Ocean of Compassion! destroy all my sorrows and confer a full abundant flow of Supreme Bliss.
अज्ञात्वा ते महत्वं यदिह निगदितं विश्वनाथ क्षमेथा:
स्तोत्रं चैतत्सहस्रोत्तरमधिकतरं त्वत्प्रसादाय भूयात् ।
द्वेधा नारायणीयं श्रुतिषु च जनुषा स्तुत्यतावर्णनेन
स्फीतं लीलावतारैरिदमिह कुरुतामायुरारोग्यसौख्यम् ॥११॥
अज्ञात्वा ते महत्वं	not knowing Thy greatness
यत्-इह निगदितं	what ever here is said
विश्वनाथ क्षमेथा:	O Lord of the Universe! Pardon me
स्तोत्रम् च-एतत्-	and this hymn
सहस्र-उत्तरम्-अधिकतरं	of a thousand and more (verses)
त्वत्-प्रसादाय भूयात्	for Thy grace be (a source)
द्वेधा नारायणीयं	in two ways it is Naaraayaneeyam
श्रुतिषु च जनुषा	and in the Vedas Thy incarnations
स्तुत्यता-वर्णनेन	sung about and described
स्फीतं लीला-अवतारै:-	it is full of Thy sportive incarnations
इदम्-इह कुरुताम्-	this here may confer
आयु:-आरोग्य-सौख्यम्	long life, good health and happiness
O Lord of the Universe! Deign to pardon me for what I have said here, not knowing fully Thy greatness. This hymn consists of more than a thousand verses. May it be the source of Thy abounding grace. It is in two ways Naaraayaneeyam. May this hymn which describes in accordance with the Vedas, Thy creative actions and Thy sportive incarnations, confer long life, good health and happiness.